---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
date: "2021-12-03T20:58:02+00:00"
draft: false
tags: ["engine", "c++", "house"]
title: "Why Not Unity?"
---

<h1>Why Not Unity?</h1>
<p>A question we often get during streaming is &ldquo;Why not Unity, or Unreal? Why did you build your own engine?&rdquo;. Having been on a couple large projects that have used Unity I can say with some authority that the answer to that is complicated. Unity is obviously working for many people and definitely gets you into the meat of development and can save you time. The projects I was involved in that used Unity would never have existed without Unity, the team just didn&rsquo;t have the skill set required to pull that off. So just because we aren&rsquo;t using Unity doesn&rsquo;t mean you shouldn&rsquo;t. If you don&rsquo;t have the skills on your team to write your own engine, then you really don&rsquo;t have a choice. If you do have the skills then you are aware of the trade-offs you&rsquo;re making.</p><p>Building an engine to support a small game with a small team isn&rsquo;t as much work as some people would have you believe. If you&rsquo;ve never built a game engine before that might seem daunting. I&rsquo;ve been building them from scratch for 20 years.</p><p>We aren&rsquo;t using Unity or Unreal because I believe we can build a better game on our own engine, and leverage it across future projects (and it really is about the end product).</p><ul><li>Our game engine is an expert system that requires a relatively high level of technical skill to use effectively. People have to learn to use it which means we can&rsquo;t just expect someone to hit the ground running because it&rsquo;s Unity.</li><li>However, the learning curve for our engine is a fraction of what it is for learning Unity or Unreal.</li><li>We have to port the engine to each platform ourselves, but I&rsquo;ve been doing that for a long time too. It does require effort but once the port is established it is minimal effort for maintenance. A lot of platforms share a significant amount of common code, like POSIX APIs etc. The biggest difference between them is typically graphics API and this is where most of the effort goes.</li><li>We take advantage of high quality C++ libraries readily available like Dear ImGui, SDL, FMOD and others.</li><li>It is significantly faster to iterate in our engine than in Unity or Unreal because we designed it to be that way. We can hot-reload assets and code on-the-fly. It compiles from scratch quickly. This has a direct impact on productivity and quality. The more iteration, the better the product. This is a primary benefit of building custom tools for your game.</li><li>Optimized builds of the game load levels in under a second and runs at 500 fps without having spent any time on performance yet.</li><li>We don&rsquo;t fight or worry about garbage collection hitches because we aren&rsquo;t using a managed language.</li><li>No AOT crap on consoles.</li><li>We don&rsquo;t spend time trying to get something to work in Unity or Unreal because of minutiae, things are direct and simple.</li><li>We can code down to the metal on consoles and other platforms.</li><li>We aren&rsquo;t on the Unity/Unreal engine upgrade treadmill where everyone has to stop for a couple days while we upgrade and cross our fingers that nothing is seriously broken by the upgrade.</li><li>We don&rsquo;t spend time dealing with 2 or 3 competing systems that do almost the same thing in different ways, and the only one that isn&rsquo;t deprecated isn&rsquo;t feature complete yet.</li><li>If you step outside of what Unity is designed for you lose a lot of its benefits.</li><li>Inevitably the version of Unity you are using will be outdated. The Asset Store middleware you are using will be out of date. Eventually your project will be lost to time, unable to be resurrected.</li></ul><p>Like anything that becomes endemic to an industry, people get used to the costs of Unity and are often not even aware that they are making a trade-off. Our development is unhindered by a lot of crap that you have to deal with when you use Unity. We really do spend the vast majority of our time just enjoying the hell out of the development process. In my personal experience on projects that have used Unity it is often stressful and frustrating due to bugs and lack of agency over things that leads to a lot less joy in the process.</p><p>Building a game on your own engine affects more than just the programming though, it affects the entire process. If your team has never shipped a game on a custom engine then they may not be able to adapt. Using Unity and Unreal affects how you think about game development and if you&rsquo;ve never built a game &ldquo;on the metal&rdquo; you have to relearn how to solve problems. Using your own engine means the solution space you have in which to solve your problems is effectively unlimited and you can solve them in simple and direct ways. The solution to &ldquo;how do I make this work in Unity?&rdquo; is often not direct, but instead takes a meandering, messy, and suboptimal approach because you can&rsquo;t make structural changes to the engine to support it. *cough* modding *cough*.</p><p>One of the most valuable things that Casey Muratori (formerly of RAD Games and author and host of Handmade Hero) teaches, if you listen closely, is <i>simplicity</i>. People who are used to using giant frameworks and other systems don&rsquo;t realize the enormous complexity and cost inherent in those systems. They mistakenly assume that the problems they have to deal with in those frameworks are inherent in any system. Problems like performance and memory management just aren&rsquo;t even things you have to really worry about if you just do it the right way to begin with. And it&rsquo;s usually simpler too, and easier to modify later.</p><p>You don&rsquo;t need fancy generalized tools to build a game. I don&rsquo;t mean tools like photoshop or Maya or other readily available commodity software. I&rsquo;m talking about the tools you inevitably need on any game to build the actual game, the part where you are putting it all together. Maybe you need a map editor, or a way to make a library of spells and their effects. The tools you need depend on what you need to build, and every game needs something. Even if you are using Unity sometimes you still have to build these one-off custom tools, but inevitably everything ends up being a question of &ldquo;How do I get this data into Unity&rdquo;.</p><p>A lot of people underestimate the raw power of expert systems and overestimate the value of general purpose tools, especially as it applies to a focused, and highly skilled team. Text is often still one of the most powerful ways of expressing data, it is easily refactored, searched, and diff&rsquo;ed. Unity ScriptableObject and Unreal Blueprints are enormously complicated systems that you don&rsquo;t need to solve in your game engine.</p><p>Effort is inevitably spent bending the general purpose tool into the specialized tool you need, and as is almost always the case, the general purpose tool does its job in a general purpose way that is not optimized for any particular use. Sometimes it&rsquo;s more work too.</p><p>Hopefully this has given you some insight into how I think about the tradeoffs. If you have never built a game from scratch you should because you will learn a ton and it will at least give you insight into how to best use Unity or Unreal.</p><p><br></p><p>Joseph Riedel</p><p>CTO, Pocketwatch Games</p>
